# .Bashrc Functionality 1

## Aliases

An alias is a custom shortcut which you define in the .bashrc file which allows for shorthand versions of terminal commands. Aliases can save time by reducing typing, especially for commands used frequently.

Examples:

```
alias k='kubectl'       (Replace 'kubectl' with 'k'. ie: k get pods -n default)
alias ll='ls -la'       (Perform a long listing including hidden files.)
alias gs='git status'   (Check the status of a git repository)
```

Aliases added in .bashrc are permanent and are loaded with each new terminal session, however you may create temporary aliases through terminal commands which affect only the current terminal:

```
alias gs='git status'
```

To view all currently defined aliases, you can use the command:

```
alias
```

To remove an alias temporarily, use the command:

```
unalias gs
```
<br>

## Environment Variables

Environment variables are user defined variables that can be used to affect the shell environment. Once an environment variable has been defined, its value can be accessed by prefixing the variable name with $, like `$VARIABLENAME`. When environment variables are defined in the .bashrc, they are permanent and will be loaded with each terminal session.

```
export KUBECONFIG='~/Downloads/openshift-cluster-kubeconfig'
export EDITOR='nano'
```

When environment variables are defined via a terminal command, they are temporary and apply only to the current terminal session. The format does not change regardless of whether they should be permanent or temporary.

```
export API_KEY='12345abcde'
```

To view all currently defined environment variables, use the following command:

```
printenv
```

To display the value of a specific variable, use:

```
echo $KUBECONFIG
```
<br>

## Prompt (PS1)

The Prompt String 1 (PS1) is a variable that defines the appearance of the command prompt in the terminal. By default, it shows information like the username, hostname, and current directory. Customising the prompt can help identify which machine or directory you’re using and enhance readability.

To modify the prompt, you can add the following line to your .bashrc file or update the value of the current PS1 variable:

```
export PS1="\u@\h:\w\$ "   (Shows username@hostname:current_directory$)
```

In the above example, you will notice a number of `\` characters followed by a letter. These are codes which define the string which should be at that location in the prompt.

- `\u`: Current username
- `\h`: Hostname of the system
- `\w`: Current working directory
- `\t`: Current time (24 hour format)
- `\d`: Current date

For these changes to take effect, you must start a new terminal session or run the following command in the current terminal:

```
source ~/.bashrc
```