# .Bashrc Functionality 2

## Export
The export command in .bashrc is used to make environment variables available to child processes of the shell. By exporting a variable, it becomes available to any program or script that runs in that terminal session.

For example, you might export a configuration variable so that a specific tool or script can use it:

```
export KUBECONFIG='~/Downloads/openshift-cluster-kubeconfig'
```

Exporting a variable through a command rather than the .bashrc file makes the variable temporary and will not persist into new terminal sessions. However if the variable is exported inside the .bashrc file, it will be permanently available in all new terminal sessions.

To check whether a variable has been sucessfully exported, you can use the following commands:

```
echo $KUBECONFIG     (Display the value of KUBECONFIG)
printenv             (Display a list of all defined variables and their values)
printenv KUBECONFIG  (Display the value of KUBECONFIG)
```

<br>

## Source
The source command is used to execute commands from a file in the current shell session. In the context of .bashrc, it’s used to reload the file and apply any changes without closing and reopening the terminal.

Whenever you make changes to .bashrc, use the source command to apply them immediately:
```
source ~./bashrc
. ~/.bashrc
```
These commands will reload .bashrc and apply all your changes to the current session, including aliases, environment variables, and any other customised settings.

<br>

## Functions

In .bashrc, functions allow you to create reusable blocks of code that can perform complex tasks with a single command, automating the process.

For example, you may create a function in .bashrc changing the current directory to a specific location which is called whenever a terminal shell is opened:

```
go_to_downloads() {
    cd ~/Downloads
}

go_to_downloads      (Call the function inside of the .bashrc to run the function each time a terminal is opened)
```

You may want to use variables in your custom functions. This is achieved by referencing the variables within the code, then passing the variable value into the function when called:

```
backup_file() {
    cp "$1" "$1.bak"
    echo "$1 has been backed up to $1.bak"
}

backup_file myfile.txt     (Passes myfile.txt into the function to be used in place of $1 within the functions logic)
```

If a function accepts multiple arguments, you should reference them within the logic using $1, $2, $3, and so on.