---
icon:
  type: logos:bash-icon
---

# .Bashrc

Configuring the Linux terminal

The terminal in Linux uses the Bash language and can be configured using a hidden file called .bashrc. This file is a script that runs each time a new terminal session starts and allows users to customise their shell environment and define settings that are automatically loaded whenever a new terminal window is opened. The default location for this file is `~/.bashrc`.

## Key Terms

- Alias: A custom shortcut for a terminal command. `Example: alias ll='ls -la'`.
- Environment Variable: A variable that affects the shell environment and its behaviour. `Example: export EDITOR=nano`.
- Prompt (PS1): The primary prompt shown whenever the terminal is ready to accept a command. By default shows information like the username, hostname, and current directory. `Example: [bencapper@fedora tutors-linux-course]$`.
- Export: A command used to make variables available to subprocesses. When set in .bashrc, exported variables are available to all shell sessions. `Example: export KUBECONFIG=~/Downloads/openshift-cluster-kubeconfig`.
- Source: Reload .bashrc changes without restarting the terminal. `Example: source ~/.bashrc`.
- Function: A reusable block of code that can automate repetetive tasks. Example:
```
my_function() {
    echo "Hello, $NAME"
}
```

## Objectives
By the end of this lab, students will be able to:
- Understand the purpose of .bashrc and how it influences the shell environment.
- Locate the .bashrc file.
- Configure an alias
- Customise the prompt
- Export environment variables
- Reload .bashrc to enable changes
- Create custom functions.
